don't talk to strangers you have heard
that phrase uttered by your friends
families schools and the media for
decades it's a norm it's a social norm
but it's a special kind of social norm
because it's a social norm that wants to
tell us who we can relate to and who we
shouldn't relate to don't talk to
strangers says stay away from anyone
who's not familiar to you stick with the
people you know stick with people like
you how appealing is that it's not
really what we do is it when we're at
our best when we're at our best we reach
out to people who are not like us
because when we do that we learn from
people who are not like us my phrase for
this value of being with not like us is
strangeness and my point is that in
today's digitally intensive world
strangers are quite frankly not the
point the point that we should be
worried about is how much strangeness
are we getting why strangeness because
our social relations are increasingly
mediated by data and data turns our
social relations into digital relations
and that means that our digital
relations now depend extraordinarily on
technology to bring to them a sense of
robustness a sense of discovery a sense
of surprise and unpredictability why not
strangers because strangers are part of
a world of really rigid boundaries they
belong to a world of people I know
versus people I don't know and in the
context of my digital relations I'm
already doing things with people I don't
know the question isn't whether or not I
know you the question is what can I do
with you what can I learn with you what
can we do together that benefits
both I spend a lot of time thinking
about how the social landscape is
changing how new technologies create new
constraints and new opportunities for
people the most important change is
facing us today have to do with data and
what data is doing to shape the kinds of
digital relations that will be possible
for us in the future economies of the
future depend on that our social lives
in the future depend on that the threat
to worry about isn't strangers the
threat to worry about is whether or not
we're getting our fair share of
strangeness now twentieth-century
psychologists and sociologists we're
thinking about strangers but they were
they weren't thinking so dynamically
about human relations and they were
thinking about strangers in the context
of influencing practices Stanley Milgram
from the 60s and 70s the creator of the
small world experiments which became
later popularized as six degrees of
separation made the point that any to
arbitrarily selected people were likely
connected from between five to seven
intermediary steps his point was that
strangers are out there we can reach
them there are paths that enable us to
reach them mark Granovetter
Stanford's a sociologist in 1973 and his
seminal essay the strength of weak ties
made the point that these weak ties that
are a part of our networks these
strangers are actually more effective at
diffusing information to us than our our
strong ties the people closest to us he
makes an additional indictment of our
strong ties when he says that these
people were so close to us these strong
ties in our lives actually have a
homogenizing effect on us they produce
sameness my colleagues and I at Intel
have spent the last few years looking at
the ways in which digital platforms are
reshaping our everyday lives what kinds
of new routines are possible
we've been looking specifically at the
kinds of digital platforms that have
enabled us to take our possessions those
things that used to be very restricted
to us and to our friends in our houses
and to make them available to people we
don't know whether it's our clothes
whether it's our cars whether it's our
bikes whether it's our books or music we
able to take our positions now and make
them available to people we've never met
and we concluded a very important
insight which was that as people's
relationships to the things in their
lives change so do their relations with
other people and yet recommendation
system after and a recommendation system
continues to miss the boat it continues
to try to predict what I need based on
some past characterization of Who I am
of what I've already done security
technology after security technology
continues to design data protection in
terms of threats and attacks keeping me
locked into really rigid kinds of
relations categories like friends and
family and contacts and colleagues don't
tell me anything about my actual
relations a more effective way to think
about my relations might be in terms of
closeness and distance where at any
given point in time with any single
person I am both close and distant from
that individual all as a function of
what I need to do right now people
aren't close or distant people are
always a combination of the two and that
combination is constantly changing
what if technologies could intervene to
disrupt the balance of certain kinds of
relationships
what if technologies could intervene to
help me find the person that I need
right now
strangeness is that calibration of
closeness and distance that enables me
to find the people that I need right now
that enables me to find the sources of
intimacy of discovery and of inspiration
that I need right now
strangest is not about meeting strangers
right it simply makes the point that we
need to disrupt our zones of familiarity
so jogging those zones of familiarity is
one way to think about strangeness and
it's a problem face not just by
individuals today but also by
organizations organizations that are
trying to embrace massively new
opportunities whether you're a political
party insisting to your detriment on a
very rigid notion of who belongs and who
does not whether you're the governor
protecting social institutions like
marriage and restricting access of those
institutions to the few whether you're a
teenager in her bedroom who's trying to
jostle her relations with her parents
strangeness is a way to think about how
we pave the way to new kinds of
relations we have to change the norms we
have to change the norms in order to
enable new kinds of technologies as a
basis for new kinds of businesses what
interesting questions lie ahead for us
in this world of no strangers how might
we think differently about our relations
with people how might we think
differently about our relations with
distributed groups of people how might
we think differently about our relations
with technologies things that
effectively become social participants
in their own right the range of digital
relations is extraordinary in the
context of this broad range of digital
relations safely seeking strangeness
might very well be a new basis for that
innovation thank you
[Applause]
[Music]